Good day i'm norman Wildberger today we're
going to introduce the notion of complexity
of a natural number and talk a little bit about
associated higher arithmetic operations which are
sometimes called hyper operations going beyond
addition multiplication and exponentiation so
we've talked a little bit about these things
I want to have a little bit more of a closer
look at a few of them ok what's the basic idea of
complexity well it's a kind of measure of how how
efficiently you can write down that number using a
given arithmetic Alfredo it's a notion that really
depends on a prior arithmetic Alfredo so you
change the arithmetic afraid work you add some
more operations then the complexity of numbers
changes but it turns out that the general facts
are often relatively unchanged the kind of large
patterns that we'll see hold independent of the
particular arithmetic Alfredo K so how does it
work in practice well we have a natural number
and and we want to consider how much work is
required to write an arithmetic expression down
that evaluates to that natural number and we count
each of these operations addition multiplication
and exponentiation as one symbol we also have
the digits of course zero to nine and we allow
ourselves a left at a right bracket and otherwise
nothing else so we're insisting that our numbers
are written down in some kind of arithmetic
expression using just this short list of
possible symbols and then we inquire given some
number what's the minimal number of symbols that
are required to write down that number and that
will be the complexity of that number within this
particular framework so for example the number
is one through nine obviously have complexity one
because one symbol is required to write the gun
the numbers from 10 to 99 have complexity to from
a hundred to 999 they have complexity 3 the first
sort of not obvious thing happens when we get to
a thousand and 24 these numbers here one thousand
two one thousand 2023 have complexity four because
there's four digits required but this one here
has complexity three because we are able to write
it as four to the fifth and that's using three
symbols from our chosen list of symbols and so
1,024 has complexity three just a little bit less
than what you would expect so there's certainly a
kind of uniformity that appears here for these
smallish numbers but that uniformity drops
off very quickly as we start getting to bigger
numbers and this becomes very very complicated and
almost fractal like very almost unpredictable and
probabilistic it's like a random walk in some ways
and so we'll we want to say some things about the
large-scale behavior of this complexity but along
the way we want to allow ourselves the freedom
of considering some more powerful operations
which we might call hyper operations that allow us
more efficiency in writing those big numbers that
we are interested in so which kind of operations
should we include in our arithmetic well actually
we have quite a lot of choice here for example we
could use the factorial notation the exclamation
mark which allows us to write 5 factorial
as 1 times 2 times 3 times 4 times 5 that's
an efficient way of writing bigger numbers with
just a simple symbol we're not going to do that
we would rather stick here in this approach to
a sequence of operations that we've talked about
a few times so going back to math foundations
17 I introduced these higher multiplications M
star K n where K runs from 1 to 3 and so on and
these are defined in duck in a interesting but
somewhat sophisticated fashion and we're gonna
give slightly new names to a few of these so
the first one is just ordinary multiplication
and the second one is exponentiation which we
often write down like this but from now on in this
lecture we'll tend to be writing it down like this
because we want to write it down in a linear
fashion so that a computer can read it easily
now the next operator the M star 3 we are going to
give another name to it we can say that's M to the
triangle N and then M star for event we're going
to give that another name we call that M to the
square n so when it introduced these sort of new
operators which we may call triangle ization and
square if ocation now this is my particular choice
of terminology a lot of people have thought about
these things we'll talk a little bit about the
history a lot of people have thought about these
things and there's quite a variety of notation
here this is one that I've thought about then
it's kind of pleasant for me I think it's sort
of useful ok so although there will be some
variability here into this theory depending on
which choice of operations we include nevertheless
to a certain extent there is a kind of uniformity
of insights that can be gained without too much
work that's largely independent of the choice
of operations so our starting point here is
that there's a natural hierarchy of operations
and addition is really the basic operation upon
which everything else rests in some treatments of
the subject the successor operation is taken as
primary and that's also a possible way to proceed
the successor operation where you're adding one
is a little bit different because you're not
combining two numbers you're just taking a number
and changing it so if we start with addition
then we can build a sequence of higher operations
inductively from addition and the beautiful thing
about this is that every step what you're doing
is just the same kind of thing as what you did in
the previous step so multiplication which is the
first of our multiplication operators star one
is defined this way that M times one equals M
so M is a natural number of your choice and here
we define M times one okay and then in this step
here we are defining this inductively we're
defining what M times n plus one is assuming
that you know what M times n is okay so assuming
you know what M times n is the way you define M
times n plus one is that is M plus M times n
okay so if we follow this procedure let's say
we weren't familiar with this operation then M
times two according this would be M plus M times
one then if we wanted to unravel this we would use
this first definition say m times one is just M so
this is just M plus M so M times two is the same
as M plus M now we've expressed it purely in terms
of the fundamental operation of addition M times
three by this recursive or inductive rule is M
plus M times two so that's M plus what we've just
calculated M times two that's M plus M so it's M
plus in brackets M plus M that's what M times
three is and then M times four is similar kind
of thing it's M plus what we just got which is M
plus M plus M with brackets like this M times five
same kind of story with the brackets are nested
inductively from the right and it's pretty clear
how the pattern carries on so that's a nice way
of thinking about how to define multiplication
in terms of addition it's quite different from the
way we define multiplication initially in terms of
sort of a rectangular array of objects but it's
a it's a pleasant alternative the inductive way
of defining these operations becomes I think
clear here with the exponentiation that's our
next one on the list so let's start to in the
star notation and here is how we define it so
M exponent 1 equals M M exponent n plus 1 is by
definition M times M exponent M all right so I'm
using the term exponent but I can also say m M to
the power n all right so what is M exponent 2 well
according to this rule here inductively it's in
terms of M exponent 1 so it's M times M exponent
1 but M exponent 1 we know is M so this is just
M times M it's the definition of M to the 2 or M
exponent 2 and then M exponent 3 is by definition
M times M exponent 2 well we've just calculated M
exponent 2 there it is there and so it's M times M
times M M exponent 4 will be M times M exponent 3
and we've just calculated that that's that thing
there so that just pops in there so it's M times
what we've just calculated and you can see that
at each stage we're taking what we've just done
and multiply it by M to get higher powers and that
way we can calculate M exponent n for any natural
number n in an inductive fashion and we also have
this alternate notation where we write an exponent
and also as the sort of tower but for complexity
discussions we prefer this notation here because
it's very clear we have the two objects and
the operation ok so these three operations
which of course are very familiar to us they of
course satisfy some additional laws they have
some additional property that are not immediately
obvious from the definition and this opens up in
fact a very big project to actually establish
these laws as consequences of the definitions
that we've just provided so this is a charting at
different course through arithmetic we could have
started this course with the first few videos
in this fashion but it's mathematically more
sophisticated it's more computer oriented I would
say then our naive approach but requires some
more sophistication because we're not allowed to
resort to physical arguments we have to actually
manipulate the inductive definitions to prove
everything so the laws I'm talking about are the
commutative laws that we all know the associative
laws for both addition and multiplication also of
course these commutative laws only hold
for addition and multiplication not for
exponentiation and then we have the distributive
laws between addition and multiplication n times
n plus P is M times n plus M times P and we agree
that multiplication is going to take precedence
over addition so we're allowed to rewrite this
without the brackets as just M times n plus M
times P so the convention is this means multiply
these two first and multiply these two then and
then add those two afterwards and on the other
side n plus n times P is M times P plus n times
P ok very good now what about with exponentiation
well there are some rules there as well that are
reasonably familiar one is that M exponent
n plus P is M exponent n times M exponent P
you'll recognize an index law and if we agree
that exponentiation has a higher precedence
than multiplication just the way multiplication
a higher precedence than addition then we can
dispense with these brackets and just write em
exponent n times M exponent P all right so when
we see an expression like this we have to do the
exponentiation first and then after we've done
them then we go to the multiplications and after
we've done all of them then we go to the additions
and there's another one which is M exponent n all
of that exponent P is equal to M exponent n times
P and that's another important index law okay
so now we come to a very interesting exercise
which could easily be several videos okay because
it's quite involved which is to go through these
laws and actually prove them so from the inductive
kind of definitions that we've already given none
of these laws are immediate because they treat
m and n quite separately quite differently so
there is some rather sophisticated inductive work
and if you are interested in the foundations of
arithmetic especially from a computer science
point of view then this is the kind of project
that very well might interest you in fact maybe
some of you have already thought about this kind
of thing all right so this is very interesting
and important exercise in the foundations of
arithmetic when we proceed in this inductive
kind of way towards the definitions so people
have been thinking about how to write down big
numbers since Archimedes like Archimedes wrote a
beautiful little paper called the sand reckoner
in which he really proposed the first really
complicated system of exponentiations and towers
to try to estimate the number of grains of sand
that could fill the universe so it's really the
first really serious attempt at getting hold of
the big number and since Archimedes time many
people have of course played around the idea
let's write a really big number and probably the
same kinds of ideas that we're talking about here
have been discovered and rediscovered dozens
probably hundreds of times in the course of
the history of mathematics and probably a lot of
those haven't really been recorded so I wouldn't
be surprised if a lot of the great mathematicians
played around with these notions and maybe just
didn't get very far and so they just left it
in some journal somewhere in the 20th century
we've seen more development in this direction
including the terminology of hyper operations
this idea that one way of getting bigger numbers
is to introduce higher operations above the three
standard ones that we've been talking about so far
and different notation and different approaches
have been spelled out by people so there's nice
arrow notation which is quite well-known that's
Donald Knuth there's fellow Bennet in 1914 who
made advances in this direction accurate men
in 1926 good Stein or Goodstein in 1947 and many
others including John Conway so there's quite a
variety of different terminologies and conventions
to get at these bigger and bigger operations that
give us bigger and bigger numbers okay so I
admit that I also I'm going to introduce yet
some more notation so I like to think about these
operations in terms of the Stars and I'm gonna
give star three which is the next one on our list
unique symbol a lot like the exponentiation symbol
it's just going to be a triangle so we'll call
this triangulation as opposed to exponentiation
and we're gonna read it just M triangle one okay
so this is a new operation which we're going to
find inductively in this fashion that M triangle
one is M that first line is going to be the same
for all the operations in this sort of family
and then this next one is also going to be the
same kind of story so M triangle n plus one
is defined in terms of M triangle n and the
previous operation on our list which in this case
is exponentiation so it's defined as M exponent
M triangle handle so the exactly the same way
that we go from addition to multiplication we
can go from multiplication to exponentiation and
from exponentiation to triangulation it's exactly
the same definition but the meaning of it is
quite different and gets at these towers of
Exponential's that we were relying so much on in
our previous videos to create very big numbers all
right so let's have a look at how this thing looks
like in some detail here so let's have a look at M
triangle 2 according to the inductive definition
M triangle 2 is expressed in terms of M triangle
1 has m exponent M triangle 1 and M triangle 1 of
course is given by the first line that's always M
so this is just M exponent M you know it's empty M
so M triangle 2 is M to the N and then M triangle
3 is M exponent M triangle - well my go-to is
just M exponent M as we've just said so we have
altogether M exponent and exponent M so it's M to
the m to the M in our more standard way of writing
things that would be M with the M above it and the
M above that Tower of three little M's one on top
of each other okay the pattern is becoming clear
M triangle for well that's M exponent M triangle
three we've just worked out what M trival 3 is
it's a tower of 3 M s on top of each other and
so we're taking em exponent that so that's then
a tower of 4m s m to the M to the M to the N we
would say and the pattern is now pretty clear in
general M triangle n or and to the triangle end
if we want to be a little bit more elaborate and
another way we might say that is the triangulation
of M to the power n that's analogous to the
exponentiation of M to the power n perhaps
okay and what does that actually look like well in
our usual notation it's a tower of MS m to the M
to the M all the way up to the M so each element
in this tower is an M and they're all together
and of them where n is the second object here so
that's what M to the triangle n is or M triangle
and it's this thing here so this is then a rather
compact new operation that of course lets us write
bigger numbers much more efficiently than we can
do with just exponentiation and multiplication and
addition so it's an important additional tool
if we want to get at bigger numbers so I think
it's well worth people thinking about this one
so that's why I want to give it a rather easy to
write down symbol that looks and behaves a lot
like the exponentiation symbol so it's part of
the same family but if we want to express it as
a member of this family star well it's the star
three so I want to go one more in our ladder of
operations of hyper operations to star sub four
which we're going to give the symbol square - okay
square because there's four sides of the square
and that corresponds to that index there the
star three was a triangle which had three sides
and we're going to call this operation square if
occasionally now that and we're going to write
it like this so here's the inductive definition
that M Square 1 is M we're used to that that's
the way all of these things start and then the
next one is again the same pattern exactly the
same pattern where we define M square n plus 1
in terms of M Square + and the previous operation
which was triangle so M square n plus 1 is and
triangle m square in okay so let's look at it in
some detail M square - that's my angle M square
1 M square 1 is M so that's M triangle M what's
that well that's a tower of em's how many in the
tower M of them so here is M square - its m to the
M to the M all the way up to the M to the M so the
tower size is the same as the actual object which
is in the tower and that's M square - so if M is
something like 10 we're talking about 10 to the 10
all the way up to the 10 to the 10 that's pretty
well modulo 23 the numbers n that we talked about
before so that would just be 10 square 2 plus 23
okay how about M square 3 well that's M triangle
M Squared - M square - we said was M triangle M so
this is M triangle M triangle M okay so let's get
our head around that so yeah the triangle means
that we have a tower of exponentiations involving
M s so we have m to the M to the M and so on all
the way up to the M and how many are there in this
tower that's what this second thing is telling us
in the triangle notation it's telling us that the
number in this tower is M triangle M which was
this thing here so the number in this exponent
is m to the M all the way up to the M where the
number and this is M so this is M square 3 it's
a tower whose size is determined by a tower whose
size is determined by M okay we can write down M
square 4 which is then M triangle we've just got
em triangle M triangle M and give it some thought
you'll see that it's the same kind of story but
now we have another tower in front of this one so
m to the M all the way to the M where the number
in that first tower is equal to this so the number
here for that case would be telling us sort of
how many groups of objects we have we would have
four groups all right so this is the operation of
square vacation of the square operator let's say
okay so possible terminologies might be M to the
square in or we've already said M square n which
I guess is probably the simplest and best or the
square of vacation of M to the power n or Russell
perhaps too much of a mouthful and in general
so if we have n here instead of two three or
four so M square n would be well there's a tower
of M's here and then the number in this tower is
another Tower of M's and the number of this towers
and other Tower of M's that we have altogether M
such Tower so the number of towers not brackets
but towers is one there's two all the way up to
this last one included that's going to be n
okay we could certainly go further and it's
a good exercise for you to think about the fifth
one along this list and write down what M let's
say pentagon five or whatever notation we should
use certainly we could just use star Phi so M star
five and what that would be for small values of n
okay it's instructive and you can sort of see that
we're getting the same kind of thing that we got
when we were taking braces and brackets of towers
of Exponential's in our creation of sayings ed
prime a few videos ago so we could certainly keep
on going but this is already enough ammunition to
get numbers which are bigger than any conceivable
practical purpose and certainly enough for us
to say some things and introduce some ideas of
this complexity let's talk a little bit about the
precedence of operations so we're going to agree
that higher operators get precedence this allow
this to be a little bit more efficient when we're
writing down arithmetic expressions with lots
of operators and that we agree to do the higher
operators first so if we have some expression like
this 3 square 5 times 4 triangle 3 square 6 then
that's actually not ambiguous because we're going
to do the squares first so 3 square 5 that really
has to be done first and 3 square 6 over here has
to be done before any of the other operators so
once we've done that one once we've done that one
then the next operator from the top down is the
triangle so we would do then for triangle whenever
we got 4 3 square 6 and once we got that then the
next one would be the multiplication and we'll
also adopt the convention that if we have the
same number strung out then we'll agree that the
brackets go like this from the right-hand side so
7 triangle 7 triangle 7 is the same as 7 triangle
7 triangle 7 so we do that one first and then we
do 7 triangle but similarly if we have 9 square 9
square 9 square 9 would interpret that to mean 9
square 9 do that first figure out what it is and
then 9 square that figure out what that is and
then 9 square of that to figure out what that is
and this agrees with this convention here that 6
exponential of 6 exponential 6 which we usually
like to write 6 to the 6 to the sixth that it
actually means first you do this exponentiation
so you calculate this 6 to the sixth and then
you take 6 to that power all right so we're
just adopting the same kind of convention that
we already have for the exponentiations at least
when we write things like this okay so now we're
set for the definition of complexity so given
a choice of symbols for digits operations and
brackets we can write possibly many arithmetic
expressions that evaluate to a given number n
so for example 2187 can be written as 3 to the 7
usually but we'll write it like this 3 exponent 7
but it also can be written as 37 times 59 plus
4 and of course there are many other ways that
it can be written now if we count the number
of symbols required here there's 1 2 3 4 5 6
7 symbols there we're counting each symbol once
whether it's a digit or a bracket or an operator
well over here we have 1 2 3 so the complexity
of n is the minimal number of symbols required
to express and using the given choice so we find
the minimal expression and count how many symbols
there are in that middle expression and that's
the complexity of n so for example if we use this
perhaps sort of standard high school arithmetic
will frame work we have the digits 0 up to 9 we
have addition multiplication exponentiation
a left bracket and a right bracket then using
this framework we want to write 2187 we can write
it as 3 exponent 7 and so it's complexity is 3
and if we want to express the dependence of the
complexity on this set of symbols that's really
what we have right it's a set it's not necessarily
ordered it's not allowing repetitions so there's
no commas here so we could write the name of that
set down here reminding ourselves that this is a
complexity that really depends on this symbol set
as the underlying framework for the arithmetic
we're considering and it very well might be the
case that if we choose a different symbol set
then the complexity will change that's certainly
gonna be the case right if we for example remove
the exponentiation as a possible symbol then
we're no longer allowed to use this expression
and then the complexity would go to four okay
so that's the basic definition and now in our
next video we want to have a look at some of the
consequences of this definition and how does this
notion of complexity or actually these notions
of complexity because there's more than one how
do they manifest themselves we look at sequence
of numbers getting bigger and bigger what can we
extract from this concept something that tells us
something about arithmetic with natural numbers
so that'll be next video hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening